Agarose gel
electrophoresis is a
technique used
to separate DNA fragments
or other macromolecules, such
as RNA and proteins,
based on their size and charge.
The first step for DNA fragments
separation is the gel preparation
or gel casting.
An appropriate amount of agarose
powder is weighed out.
For standard agarose
gel electrophoresis.
Larger molecules are resolved better
using a low concentration
gel, while
smaller molecules separate
better at high concentrate gel.
Once the agarose has been weighed,
an appropriate buffer
such as tar or TB, is poured
into the bottle.
Agarose
does not dissolve
until it is heated.
Therefore, the solution is heated
for a few seconds
in a microwave oven.
Once the agarose is fully dissolved,
the solution is cooled to about 55°C
in a water bath.
while the agarose
solution is cooling,
an electrophoresis tank
with a negative electrode
and a positive
electrode is prepared
for gel casting.
The comb is placed in the tank
to create wells for loading samples.
Then, casting
dams are fixed in the tank
so that the agarose solution
does not flow out during setting.
Once the agarose solution has cooled
to about 55°C
and before
pouring it into the electrophoresis
tank, the Citium bromide is added.
The idiom bromide is highly toxic
as a mutagen,
so it must be carefully
handled in a fume hood.
The sodium bromide is
an intercalated agent
which interpolates
between base
pairs of the DNA molecule.
When it is exposed
to ultraviolet light.
It will fluoresce
and DNA bands become visible.
The more DNA present,
the brighter the band.
After addition of Ethereum bromide,
the agarose solution is poured
into the electrophoresis tank.
Then the gel is allowed
to solidify at room temperature.
Once the gel has solidified,
the comb is carefully removed
as well as the casting dams.
Next, the gel is submerged in a tar
or TB running buffer,
which used to provide ions
that carry a current
and to maintain the pH
of a relatively constant value.
After the preparation
of the agarose gel,
the next step
is the
preparation of the DNA samples.
The loading buffer is added to
each sample.
This buffer contains
glycerol in certain dyes
such as bromophenol blue,
and it is used to add density
to the sample,
allowing it to sink into the gel
to provide color and simplify
the loading process,
and to allow the user to monitor
the progress of the separation.
Before loading the
samples into the wells,
a molecular weight size
marker, known as a DNA
ladder is commonly
used as a standard reference
that contains
DNA fragments of known lengths.
It is loaded into the first
well of the agarose gel.
Once the molecular weight
size marker has been loaded,
the DNA samples are loaded
into the wells.
After adding the samples
into the wells,
a lid is placed
on the electrophoresis tank.
Then an electric current
is applied to pull the samples
through the gel
based on their charge and size.
The DNA molecules will travel
through the gel at different speeds.
The DNA molecules have
a negative charge
because of the phosphate groups
and their sugar phosphate backbone.
Therefore, when placed in
an electric field,
DNA fragments start moving
through the matrix of the gel
towards the positive pole.
Because all
DNA fragments
have the same amount of charge
per mass.
Small fragments
move through the gel
faster than large ones.
Due to the relatively small molecule
size of bromo phenol blue.
It migrates
faster than DNA
and by optical control
of the migrating colored band.
The electrophoresis can be stopped
before the dye.
So before the samples
have completely migrated
through the gel and leave it.
Once the DNA fragments
have been separated,
the gel is placed under UV light.
Then the DNA fragments
can be seen as bands.
Each band
contains a large number of DNA
fragments of the same size,
that have all traveled
as a group to the same position.
By comparing the DNA
bands of the samples
to the DNA latter,
we can determine their
approximate sizes.